It is 5.30pm on a Thursday evening in Mumbai. Finding a seat in the Mumbai local at this hour? A piece of cake, I reckon. The only thing is, the otherwise empty trains to the Churchgate station are packed with men and women in blue jerseys, most of them flaunting No. 7 and No. 18. Some are armed with placards, posters, horns all are speculating about how the India versus West Indies semifinal in the World Twenty20 2016 will pan out. However, if the loud conversations are to be believed, most of them are looking forward to a Virat Kohli v Chris Gayle showdown. No, West Indies do not stand a chance, not even in their wildest dreams.

Well, its 6pm, and the train decides to pull a doosra on me and a few hundred supporters. It doesnt halt at Marine Lines station the closest stop to the Wankhede Stadium, and heads straight to Churchgate. Soon I found myself in a deluge of supporters, all bleeding blue. Amidst that sea of people, it was hard to catch the rhythm of Arabian Seas ebb and flow. Tricolour patches for Rs 30, blue jerseys for Rs 400 and flags for Rs 50, I had never seen a busier Marine Drive till date.

The formidable Wankhede, in all its glory, stood tall like the Pied Piper of Hamelin, as hundreds and thousands of supporters marched on to the allotted seats. And all along, they chanted, sang and some even broke into impromptu jigs  bhangra to be precise.

With the best chaser and the best finisher in the team, the only hurdle between India and a berth at the World T20 final was the legend of the Gaylestorm. Moreover, the toss cast a shadow of doubt. We were not chasing. The crowd was not happy. Besides, there were two changes in the lineup. Ajinkya Rahane and Manish Pandey made it to the playing XI. A gamut of emotions surged as the National Anthem played on. I was tending to my own goose bumps at the top tier of the Sachin Tendulkar stand. It did take a while to soak in the roaring, deafening atmosphere. At the DJs cues, and sometimes without them, the packed Wankhede, in myriad shades of blue, broke into shrill spurts of Jeetega bhai jeetega, India jeetega and We want sixer, we want sixer, alongwith the Sachinnn, Sachinnnn and Kohliiiiiii, Kohliii chants. It was a clear signal  on a batting pitch, we couldnt settle for anything below 200.

After two meagre overs, the floodgates opened. Mumbai boy Rohit Sharma was smacking boundaries all around the park. The otherwise criticalofRohit crowd was happy to be dumbfounded. This was the start India needed, and this was the kind of spectacle a semifinal deserved to be. As India effortlessly cruised towards a massive total, a bunch of people next to me broke into a maskedflash mob, followed by an enthralling Mexican wave. And after Rahane fell, when MS Dhoni came out to bat, the girl next to me burst into tears of joy, as she held her placard high. It read  Dhoni, Dhoni, Sirf Main Hoon Teri Soni! Dhoni, Dhoni, only I am your beloved!. She had to be literally comforted by her husband. Ah, that was a tough one.

Twenty overs and several fielding errors later, we were at the innings break I was trying to catch some breath. Most were busy clicking selfies. Some even timed their photos in such a manner that the frames had the Indian players on the giant screen. And before we knew, the Men in Blue were out there.

It was time to pull up our socks. The crowds unanimous advice get Gayles wicket before he chased the entire total down. It wasnt too far in the past that he had singlehandedly demolished the England side at the same venue. You get Gayle, you get ticket to the final.

Indian cricket fans burn portraits of players as they stage a funeral of the Indian cricket team in the streets of Siliguri on March 31, 2016, after India's defeat in the men's semifinal match between India and West Indies in a World T20 cricket tournament match played at Mumbai.  Getty Images
Later, as is often the case in India after a loss in a major event, effigies of the players were burnt  this in Siliguri in West Bengal.  Getty Images

Dhoni must have said the same to Jasprit Bumrah, who dutifully as he was asked, smashing Gayles offstump with the opening ball of his spell. This was the second time he had castled Gayle, after dismissing him during one of the warmup matches. The crowd was on its feet, some had already made plans to be out of the stadium by 10pm. He is out its only a matter of a few overs now, a Kohli fanatic next to me declared.

Who could have foretold the downhill slide that was ahead of us? And who could have thought how scathing the Mumbaikars could get? I was taken aback and how! Yes, dismissals off noballs are disappointing they cost us the World T20 perhaps. But badmouthing your heroes is a step too far not for the crowd I was part of though. With every boundary Simmons and Charles scored, there were acrimonious remarks passed across the stands. The spirit of cricket was crumbling, as the supporters jeered and booed.

Dhonis talismanic move  bringing Kohli into attack  did reap a wicket, but the cheers were ephemeral. The stands were emptying. I had the entire row to myself. A group of men in their 50s, seated right behind me were obviously conflicted. In the 19th over, they reminisced about the good old days of West Indian cricket. They were smiling. It was a respite from the otherwise bitter crowd losing their loyalty. However, Andre Russell sent the ball out of the park to seal the victory with two balls to spare in the final over. It was a batting paradise, and lets just say, West Indies batted superbly under overwhelming pressure.

I was sad I couldnt catch any of Gayles sixes, but definitely sadder to see the oscillating support system of the crowd. It took me less than 10 minutes to leave the ground the crowd was already outside the stadium cursing their luck  Paise waste ho gaye and Dhoni ko retire karna chahiye to Kohli deserves a better team.

Perhaps, Team India deserves a better support system.

This England team.

Through to the ICC World Twenty20 2016 final, after thrashing the previously undefeated New Zealanders. Just wow.

Its hard not to imagine Alanis Morissette faintly singing her hit song Ironic in the background somewhere. New Zealand, the team England modelled themselves on after last years disastrous 50overs World Cup, now put to the sword by Roy of the Overs and Co.

7.2 overs, to be precise. Or 44 balls. Thats what it took Jason Roy to smash his 78 against New Zealand, a knock that obliterated any faint hope Kane Williamson and his team had of progressing to Kolkata and a final against India or West Indies. My moneys on India by the way, for what its worth.

Roy da Boy, a name offered to him by Chris Jordan more on him later, smashed four boundaries in the first over of the England innings. Two were streakier than a greasy bacon sarny, but no matter. He was off and running.

And even then, after the best innings of his life  the innings that took England to their second World T20 final in six years  he was still furious with himself for getting out. I absolutely love that ferocity. Its what weve lacked for so, so long.

I just went out and gave it a crack, mate, Roy said at his deserved Player of the Match presentation. What a superb quote.

 He is second to none in the ease with which he moves from one form of cricket to another, perfectly comfortable in all three formats of the game.

I first saw him in the inaugural season of the Indian Premier League IPL, and was immediately impressed by his poise and ability to innovate. His driving on the off, with its unusual followthrough, had me worried that this aspect would probably cause him grief in the long run. But that has been belied since.

This shortarmjablike drive has almost disappeared from his repertoire, but when he does resort to it, he does it with aplomb. His temperament is monumentally calm. If there were occasions in the past when he appeared to be distracted by onfield verbal skirmishes, he seems more controlled now.

Kohli watches the ball extremely closely as all great batsmen do, and his judgement of length and almost intuitive ability to find gaps in the field are superb. He is a complete batsman  he is secure in defence, possesses attacking shots all round the wicket, and runs brilliantly between the wickets. He paces his innings well, apparently knowing exactly when to step on the gas. His fielding and catching betray amazing reflexes and extraordinary preparation.

If I must compare him with players from the past, the precision of his onside play reminds me of Sunil Gavaskar, but Sunil knew where his off stump was better than Kohli seems to know his. This, besides the need to play with softer hands when the ball is moving around, is probably the one technical adjustment Kohli needs to make him a better batsman in England than he is now.

For all my favourite batsman Rahul Dravids mastery at one drop, Kohli tends to inspire greater confidence as soon as he arrives at the crease in the same position. Like the other greats of Indian batting, he too is wristy, but cannot equal VVS in his elegance, nor GR Viswanath in the steely power with which he whipped the ball away on the on side  off the back or front foot.

He has almost every shot in the book, and if he could sweep and play the cut over third man, he could be Sachin Tendulkars equal in strokemaking. Come to think of it, unlike Viswanath or Dravid, he does not squarecut that much, does he? He doesnt seem to be affected by personal milestones  no nervous nineties for him  and thats one area in which he is clearly superior to Tendulkar.

Will Kohli break every batting record there is? Will he master English conditions? Will he win more matches off his own bat than any other Indian batsman? I suspect he will, sooner rather than later. For, he has arrived at a stage in his cricket career that appears meditative, almost spiritual in its sense of balance.

After three weeks of frenetic cricket activity, of setting targets and chasing them down, it has all come down to the final three games  the knockouts  in the ICC World Twenty20 2016.

Sticking to the men here, for the four teams that have made it this far  New Zealand, West Indies, England and India  none of what they have done these past three weeks matter anymore.

T20 being the format that it is, all editions of the World T20 have had different winners. And, keeping that in mind, New Zealand are the only team in the mix now not to have won the tournament before.

If India or West Indies win, they would not only become the first to claim the World T20 title twice, but become the first to win the OneDay International World Cup and World T20 titles twice.

When Virat Kohli joined Royal Challengers Bangalore for the inaugural season of the Indian Premier League in 2008, he was an excitable 19yearold who, just a few months back, had led India Under19 to the World Cup title in Kuala Lumpur. He had the tools of the trade, but he was then just another new kid on the block. Today, he is Indias Test captain, the toast of a nation and inarguably the best Twenty20 batsman in the world, a staggering progression in a reasonably short span of time.

When he joined us as this 19yearold kid, you could see even then that he was exceptionally talented, Rahul Dravid, the captain of Royal Challengers in IPL I, told Wisden India. But as is the case with most 18 and 19yearolds, there were a lot of questions. How would he play the short ball? Would he develop his range of strokes on the offside, given that he was predominantly an onside player? Would he temperamentally make a successful shift from Under19 and firstclass cricket to international cricket, which is an entirely different ball game? I guess we have got all the answers now.

Dravid isnt given to excess of anything  not excessive praise, and most certainly not so much as excessive criticism  but you could sense admiration as he held forth on the evolution of the young hopeful Kohli into one of the best batsmen in the world. A lot of hard work has obviously gone into it, but more than that, Virat understands his own game like few other batsmen do. There have been numerous instances of extremely talented young batsmen struggling to make a successful transition from Under19 to international cricket. There can be various reasons for that.

Virat was at the receiving end of those questions I raised earlier even during his initial days in Test cricket, when he made his debut in the West Indies, said Dravid of that 2011 series which India won 10. Dravid made a sevenhour 112 in the 63run win in the first Test at the Sabina Park in Kingston, while Kohli had a fairly forgettable debut with scores of 4 and 15. But over time, his evolution has been remarkable. He has just got better and better, and theres a great lesson in it there for all youngsters.

Apart from his great skills, Dravid emphasised, the genesis of Kohlis overwhelming successes over the last couple of years lay elsewhere too. A lot of people talk about his batting, but he is also a very smart kid who analyses the game exceedingly well, the former Indian captain continued. He knows his game extremely well, he knows how to read situations, he has great confidence in his skills, he knows what is workable and what is not. He is now no longer just an onside player he is one of the finest coverdrivers in the world cricket, and his offside play doesnt suffer in comparison to his legside play.

The staggering ease with which Kohli hunted down Australias 160 in the mustwin ICC World Twenty20 Super 10 clash in Mohali on Sunday night left several shellshocked and in awe. Dravid too was suitably impressed with not just the quantum and the quality of the runs  an unbeaten 82 off 51 deliveries  but the manner in which Kohli went about the task.

He has been a very good chaser for a while now, but Sunday was something else, chuckled Dravid. You have seen him chase totals earlier too, so sometimes you think What more can he do? And then he ends up surprising you! He has taken the art of chasing to a whole new level. Truly, a new level. I mean, look at the strokes he played  hardly a shot in anger, no beefy sixes, just fours galore to every part of the ground.

He started with a whip to midwicket, followed it up with a squarecut. He drove down the ground, through and over the covers, just about to every part of the ground but those are the exact same shots he would have played in Test cricket too. He didnt do anything differently to what he would have done in a Test innings, and yet to score at the rate at which he did was mindboggling. Virat didnt play the paddle and the scoop and the reverse and any of those shots. Just everyday shots you will see in all formats. To play James Faulkner in the manner in which he did in the 18th over, to hit four fours in the penultimate over from Nathan CoulterNile”

Man, seriously impressed!
To leave it so late, and to have so much to do, I can think of many other players who would have slogged, who would have tried to hit the big sixes, sometimes in panic. Virat trusted his game totally, he knew what he was capable of doing, he saw the gaps where they existed, he instinctively knew where he was going to hit the ball. To do that in a big game, in such a highpressure situation, was a huge credit to him.

Having recently coached the India Under19 boys to a silvermedal finish at the World Cup in JanuaryFebruary, Dravid agreed that there were several learnings for young kids from the manner in which Kohli has been batting in Twenty20 cricket. There are different ways to score runs in cricket, in any form of cricket, pointed out Dravid. Batsmen like Virat, like AB de Villiers and Steven Smith, they are successful across formats. When young kids ask me if it is possible to score runs across the three formats, I use the example of these three men primarily to tell them that yes, you can succeed in all formats, you can score in all versions because they have shown that it is possible.

Of course, as I said earlier, there are different ways to score runs, even in the Twenty20 game. Virat has been making that obvious for a while now Sunday was another example of how you can score quickly and heavily by relying entirely on cricketing shots.

Dravid was also taken in by Kohlis attention to detail, to the onus he places on preparation, and his willingness to walk the extra yard to make sure he leaves nothing to chance. It was another example of his meticulous preparation, his desire to play for India A against Australia A in Chennai in the fourday game, said Dravid. I mean, he was the Test captain, he didnt need to do that now, did he? But India were about to tour Sri Lanka, and he wanted a feel of the longer version before that Test series. In a lot of the things that he has done, Virat has taken the right steps, made the right choices. It is no surprise or accident that he has evolved into the batsman he is today.

A little over two months back, outside of those that followed the Indian Premier League closely, not many knew a great deal about two young men who had received rave reviews from the big men involved with their franchise.

Much of the appreciation that came the way of Jasprit Bumrah and Hardik Pandya was dismissed cynically  in what has almost become a norm  as talking up average cricketers who were plying their trade for a more than average IPL franchise. Bumrah and Pandya, both happy 22 year olds, have been with Mumbai Indians all their IPL life with their exponential growth as cricketers and individuals, they have shown that not everything is hype, that not always do we need to be cynical.

With the skillsets they possess, Bumrah and Pandya have established themselves in the Indian Twenty20 International setup, for now. Bumrah the paceman who has worked tremendously hard with Lasith Malinga to develop a mean yorker at the death, Pandya the allrounder who can give the cricket ball a mighty thwack from the off and send down three, sometimes four tidy overs of seamup. Mahendra Singh Dhonis prayers answered, you could say.

Bumrahs unusually complex slingy action makes him hard to pick, especially for those who havent seen much of him. From January 23, when he made a somewhat fortuitous OneDay International debut in Sydney, to now, Bumrah has gone from unknown commodity to marked man, but for all the video analyses, he is still hard to pick. Apart from his action, the fact that he can get the ball to dart in or move away from the righthand batsman with little change in wrist position adds to the mystique around the young man who is perfectly at ease with a ball in hand, but is otherwise a shy, taciturn individual somewhat uncomfortable under the arclights.

Pandya is the diametric opposite. Armed with the wanna and gonna that comes nearly as quickly as the ubiquitous earstud, Pandya loves the camera. He is a showman who isnt afraid to be seen as one he leaps up and clicks his heels in celebration  Brett Lee and Stuart Binnylike  upon taking a wicket, he enjoys each catch, no matter how straightforward, with an abandon that is designed to put a smile on your face or irritate you beyond words. Bumrah is old school Pandya is the new, feisty, inyourface kid on the block. Between them, they have offered options that Dhoni has craved for so long they have also delivered when it has mattered.

One of the things that stands out in the younger generation of today is the selfconfidence and the selfbelief that even Virat Kohli concedes he didnt have when he made his India debut some eight years back. They have played so much T20 cricket in the IPL, and played with big stars. In this format, their preparation and mental setup is very different to mine when I came into the team. We didnt have this much exposure of playing with big players, or of having to perform at this level, said Kohli. These people have played IPL finals, performed in different situations. They have brought that confidence here, which is a very good thing. They have not paid that much attention to who is in the opposition, who I am bowling to or batting against. They have backed their skills and that has been an xfactor for our team in the last few series.

That confidence has manifested itself in wonderful comebacks for Bumrah in Indias last two games at the ICC World Twenty20 2016. In the Super 10 game against Bangladesh in Bangalore a week back, Bumrah got off to a nightmarish start on the field  misfield first ball to gift Tamim Iqbal a boundary, dropped regulation catch to offer the lefthand opener a fresh lease, and then blasted out of sight in thanksgiving by said batsman, who smashed him for four fours the over after the drop.

As Dhoni was to point out later, it was the first time in his brief international career that Bumrah was put under pressure. He responded magnificently  just 13 runs in his last two overs, and six in the penultimate over of the chase when the yorkers homed in on limb and stumps as if by rote.

Then, against Australia in Mohali on Sunday, Bumrah was taken to the cleaners in his first over by Usman Khawaja. Second over of the match, four fours, 17 runs. So what does Bumrah, shy smile but otherwise emotionless visage, do? Finish with 1 for 32 from four, cleaning up Glenn Maxwell with a slower one that only arrived long after the batsman had completed his agricultural swipe.

Dhoni attributed Bumrahs ability to bounce back to a belief in his own abilities. The selfconfidence in executing or knowing what youre strength is, the Indian skipper said of what makes Bumrah the calm performer that he is, especially in the end overs. If you can bowl the yorker, you can easily fall back on it. People talk about Malinga  if you see his strength, yes he can swing the new ball but if somebody goes after him, hes very good with the yorkers. He has a slightly different action. The same is applicable to Bumrah also. He has a different action and he actually watches the batsman right till the end. There have been quite a few instances where the batsman has gone for the lap shot and hes actually bowled the slower delivery, which means he is watching the batsman right till the end. Thats what gives him the strength and also the confidence that if needed, he can bowl a yorker  it gives him the confidence to come back and bowl two very good overs for the team.

Bumrah has worked a lot with Malinga in the Mumbai Indians nets and quite clearly has picked up plenty from the master slinger. By his own acknowledgement, Malinga is his idol and role model, and the master will have taken more than a little bit of pride in the manner in which his ward has progressed in international cricket in such a short span of time.

Pandya brings more versatility than Bumrah  one of the weak links in the field, Dhoni has said of the pacer  with his ferocious ballhammering, his brisk and busy medium pace and an energy and enthusiasm on the field that has perked up several of the seniors. He loves a challenge, tackling it with not just a calm head but also a smile. He will be the first to admit that he lucked it out in the final over against Bangladesh, but it wasnt his fault that Mushfiqur Rahim and then Mahmudullah picked out deep midwicket off two successive innocuous deliveries.

The Baroda lad is about as expressive as Bumrah isnt, but he isnt just bluster and bravado. Dhoni is very quick and adept at sussing what is showboating and what is the real deal. In the T20 world, given the resources available, Pandya is very much the real deal  crucial, quick runs down the order and key strikes at a decent economy beyond the Power Play.

Hardik is going through a phase where there will be ups and downs. As a youngster, you are full of confidence and thats where cricket steps in, the skipper pointed out. You get a ride of your own, you score big in a game, then you dont for a few games, then you come back strong. Once you go through these chapters, you become a more accomplished cricketer.

Two wins. Thats all that remains between this 22yearold twosome and a World Cup winners medal. And that too just over two months since donning India colours for the first time. Two to tango, did someone say?

So we are two wins away from World Twenty20 glory.

When you think back to how woefully inept England were at last years 50over World Cup, thats pretty impressive.

Sure, different format. Different coach. Different, well, lots of things really.

Ben Stokes for one.

Stokes wasnt even in Englands squad 12 months ago. How utterly bizarre that seems now. Stokes, this gingerhaired man mountain born in New Zealand  now that explains a few things!  is the oxygen fuelling this England team right now.

His bowling at the death against Sri Lanka was unerringly good. Here is a quick bowler with all the craft and temperament to not only cope with the pressure of the graveyard shift at the end of an innings, but someone who actually thrives on it.

Stokes said as much on Monday, saying at a press conference that he would rather bowl the final over himself than watch someone else doing it  he gets too nervous. You dont get many characters like that in life. If cricketers were Top Trumps cards, then Stokes would win on Strength and Cunning every time.

Before going out to bat, Stokes prowled the technical area in front of Englands bench, eyeing Sri Lankas bowlers like a lioness surveying her pray in the Savannah. In he came, and launched a massive six off the only ball he faced  the last of the innings. It was only six runs, but it felt bigger. It felt like it edged England past the parscore mark, and into decent score territory.

But for all the Stokesloving going on since Saturday, the great thing about this England team is that lots of players are turning in performances.

Against Afghanistan, after a disastrous batting performance had us fearing another Bangladesh, or Ireland, or Holland theres been plenty to choose from, up stepped Moeen Ali, whose 41 saved England. When David Willey joined Moeen, England were 83 for 7. It could have been as unpleasant as forgetting to buy your kids an Easter egg from the Easter Bunny until Saturday night  nothing a late dash to a 24hour garage didnt fix, youd be pleased to know.

England have a wellrounded team now. One that has learnt to play with freedom, to showcase their qualities rather than wilt under pressure. Trevor Bayliss and Eoin Morgan must take some credit here. They have developed a culture within which players are taking it upon themselves to go out and win matches for their country. From the magnificent Yorkshire specimen, Joe Root, in Mumbai, to Stokes, Jos Buttler and Jason Roy in New Delhi  almost everyone has contributed at one stage or another.

And so it is with this unnerving sense of optimism that we approach a semifinal against New Zealand.

Scarily  if you believe in such things  the omens look good, too. The game is in New Delhi, our third game there which is a bonus in itself. Then theres the fact we beat New Zealand in a preWorld T20 friendly earlier this month. But my favourite one is the one Paul Collingwood told Stokes after Englands firstgame defeat against West Indies, that Collys World T20winning team of 2010 also lost to West Indies in their first game of the tournament.

Im sure Kane Williamson and Co would be quaking in their boots now.

New Zealand are the only undefeated team left in the competition, and would certainly be a huge test for England. After Wednesday, I might look like a fool for suggesting we have even a whiff of a chance of beating them, but such is the beauty of sport. Its why Chris Gayle dancing with the Afghanistan team on Sunday would be one of the enduring images of this World T20  you just never know whats going to happen next.

As England fans, we are in that weird position of being satisfied with how we have done in the competition already, but now wanting that little bit more That unthinkable place in the final. Pardon me for being a touch greedy, but Im well up for a second final in six years. How very unEnglish of me!

Well have to ride our luck, and improve in certain areas. Our spinners went for 63 off four painful overs against Sri Lanka. We need to be cuter and vary our pace and length against New Zealand, and theres nothing wrong with firing down a few darts if the fuller, floaty ones are going the distance.

England approach New Delhi as overwhelming underdogs on Wednesday, but with Man Mountain Stokes ready to charge in against New Zealand, this wonderfully exciting and unpredictable team could yet go the distance. Colly thinks theres a chance, and thats good enough for me.

Shane Watson is a figure that has long polarised Australian fans. A player made up of more parts underperformance than aweinspiring moments of domineering brilliance, Watsons evolution into the senior member of the Australian cricketing team he is today has arrived fitfully at best.

While his faults as a player are not egregious, it is their consistency that has long sullied Watsons reputation among Australian fans. Since his international debut 14 years ago, Watson has routinely amounted to slightly less than the sum of his parts. At the outset of his career, he had it all youth, top wickettaking form in the Sheffield Shield, a consistent middleorder batting record and a stint at the Australian Cricket Academy. Exalted by none other than Steve Waugh as Australias first genuine allrounder since Keith Miller and Alan Davidson not fifty years prior, Watson had the makings of a onceinageneration star alongside his iconic Australian contemporaries in Waugh, Ponting, Warne and McGrath.

Before these hopes had fully come to bear, however, Watson was sidelined from the Australian OneDay International team after picking up three stress fractures in his back. It was a pattern that would repeat itself with unnerving regularity over the course of his career. Ultimately, no matter how ardently Watson wished to play cricket for Australia, his body, and later his batting technique, would fail him to frustrating effect.

Though the accolades Watson has earned are many  backtoback Allan Border Medals and Man of the Series in the 2012 World Twenty20 among them  his legacy among cricket fans and pundits is altogether more conflicted. While others around him overcame early limitations to emerge closer to the shadow of Australian greats, Watson has always struggled to replicate such a wholesale resurgence. Michael Clarke surmounted youthful hubris and an ailing back to rebuild a splintered Australian side with his astute captaincy and crisp batting performances under pressure. Steven Smith has defied all early expectations to achieve much the same, with some way to go yet. In the eyes of cricket folklore, however, Watsons greatest crime in the Australian cricketing dynasty from which he sprung will always be his failure to meet the potential he so tantalisingly presented.

Few are more aware of this looming gulf than Watson himself. At the time of his retirement from Test cricket after the 2015 Ashes, Watson remarked that he had not achieved everything in Test cricket that he had dreamed of. He had ultimately fallen short of the allrounders dream of averaging over 50 with the bat and close to 20 with the ball.

It was a departure tinged with sadness, for what once was and what could have been. But, said Watson, he was proud nonetheless. Though mocked more than perhaps any other Australian cricketer of his time, save for Mitchell Johnson during the trough of his career, there is one thing that observers cannot deny of Watson, and that is his attimes lumbering, but consistently backbreaking, devotion to the game. For every wicket wasted to an lbw, there is another instance of Watson bowling with exacting success, showing leadership in a time of significant upheaval in the Australian bowling ranks.

In the end, it was Virat Kohli who sounded the death knell for Shane Watsons international career. These days, wherever India is concerned, the answer seems always to be Kohli. Although it was only a matter of Watson potentially playing out two more matches during the finals stage of the World T20, the manner of Australias loss resonated with the niggling inconstancies of Watsons career.

Kohli has emerged as one of the greatest finishers of the sport, compiling the highest number of runs in successful T20I chases. Behind him, in third place, sits Watson. Where Kohlis trajectory continues on an upward trend in leaps and bounds, Watsons has always lurched fitfully between injuries. While Kohlis 82 not out from 51 balls was the gamechanging moment that catapulted India into the semifinals, Watsons 18 runs, two wickets and one splendid catch in the deep were not quite enough.

No doubt, Kohli is the sort of teamdefining player that Watson has always aspired to. Following the victory against Australia, the Indian team lined up for the customary shaking of hands with the Australians. This time, however, Kohlis was the first hand each player shook  such was the extent of their respect and indebtedness to this young behemoth of the game. It is the kind of adoration that the sensitive Watson has long craved, but which evaded him on this one final occasion in Mohali.

However, as much as Watsons career has plateaued in recent years, the man himself has grown concurrently in altogether more significant ways. While, three years ago, Watson flew out of Mohali for the birth of his child in ignominy, having been suspended for a Test due to his failure to complete homework set by thencoach Mickey Arthur, here he walked off the ground for the last time with his family  a little more complete, a little more mature.

For a generation of fans accustomed to seeing Watsons hulking figure lumbering back to his mark, the incredulous shakes of his head when bested by an opponent, or his despondent shuffle back to the stands, Watson is a unique stalwart of the side whose presence cannot be replicated. He will be missed.

On that Mohali night, after 14 long years playing for Australia at every level of the game, Watson had given his all and his team had ultimately come up short. At the end of the day, in a sport that is as fickle as it is exhilarating, as capable of turning men into heroes as postscripts in history, this had to be okay. And for Watson, exiting with the knowledge that he had done all that he could, both here and over the course of his playing years, this was, at last, okay.

Its strange and its confusing, at times amusing, but, in the end, its always agonisingly painful. Pakistan and World Cups, whatever the format, have had a turbulent and distressing relationship. This time, the relationship had touched perhaps its lowest point.

Not that there was a lot of hope about the teams chances this time. But still, crashing out without putting up much of a resistance has dented the morale of the disgruntled fans across Pakistan.

Disastrous outings against England in the UAE, where they lost the OneDay Internationals 31 and then the Twenty20 Internationals series 30, followed by the New Zealand tour where the hosts won the T20Is 21 and the ODIs 20, were bad enough. Then came the belowpar Asia Cup. All of it, together, meant that Shahid Afridis men never actually gave their fans any realistic reason to hope. But how do you explain that to the diehard cricket fan on the street, who never stops believing?

Apart from the time Imran Khan brought to Pakistan the 1992 World Cup trophy, and then 17 years later when Younis Khan lifted the World T20 cup at Lords in 2009, world events for Pakistan have been nightmares. But more due to their own shortcomings than anything else.

Admittedly, they have done better in the shortest format than the inbetween one, making it to the finals and semifinals twice each, but the last two editions have had them putting their guards down, mishandling their selection, failing to put up a decent fight and crashing out.

Needless to say, the atmosphere in Pakistan is sombre after what has widely been called a pathetic show by the national team. For a nation traumatised by terrorism in recent years, cricket is the one thing that breaks the despondency and gives people reason to smile and cheer. But, perhaps, the officials holding the reins of this unifying passion fail to realise the disheartening effects of their unnecessary bloopers. Imran Khan, taking to Twitter, has blamed political pressure and cronyism for the situation.

Zain Jaffrey, a banker living in Toronto who wakes up in the wee hours to follow Pakistans games, has given up The entire system is down. The Pakistan Cricket Board is run by an 80yearold man Shaharyar Khan, who doesnt remember in the evening what he said in the morning. Everyone is more concerned in saving their seats rather than saving the game. You need professionals to run the game, warna cricket ka Allah Hafiz otherwise its goodbye to cricket.

Similar were the thoughts of Farhan Nasir, a Lahorebased cricket writer. Before you point fingers at the team, look at what your chairman and selection committee is doing. How can a chairman be insane enough to say during the event that your team is ranked seventh so dont expect much from them, and then talk about replacing the captain Afridi right before you have a doordie match against the Kiwis? That statement to me was a recipe for disaster.

Like with all previous postWorld Cup soulsearching exercises, the upcoming damagecontrol efforts seem to be of the triedandtestedandfailed variety.

The newspapers in Pakistan are predicting Afridi and Waqar Younis, the coach, to go first, followed by the chairman of the selection committee Haroon Rasheed and batting coach Grant Flower. Mohammad Irfan and Mohammad Sami are likely to lose their places due to a lack of fitness, while Ahmed Shehzad and Umar Akmal are set to be sent back to domestic cricket to try and improve their game and their attitude. Its become a bit of a joke, as a tongueincheek story in Dawn tried to bring out the other day.

From 1996 to 2016, after each drubbing, every successive PCB chief has followed the identical mantra of firing and replacing officials to try and bring town the temperatures. Does this help in the long term?

Tariq Saeed, a senior broadcaster and journalist, doesnt think so. PCB lacks imagination and administrative guts. Everyone in the team is firing guns at each other. The captain blames the players, the coach points fingers at the selection committee, the players are seen requesting former greats to help change their batting orders  have you ever seen such a chaos in any other camp? It seems like PCB has no control over anyone and to ask the team to win from here would be foolish, he says.

Unless and until you bring in professional people and build effective infrastructure, dont expect to get dividends. Waqar can be replaced by Wasim Akram, Haroon Rasheed can make way for someone else, but unless you dont go down and address the issues at the grassroots level, you will continue to see one disaster after another.

Tariq might well have a point. The domestic roots of Pakistan cricket are in a shambles. Despite cricket being so big, people are hardly aware of the happenings at the domestic level and dont even recognise any player till he gets a national call. School and club cricket lack quality and spark and have failed to throw up any serious talent. And no one seems to be interested in rolling up his sleeves and paying attention where its actually required.

No one, officials or former crickets, want to work on the domestic level where you can bring an actual change, says Majid Bhatti, the senior cricket journalist. Everyone wants to be the boards chairman or coach the national team only because there is a lot of glamour, media attention and money. We havent produced any quality fast bowler or opener since Amir and Salman Butt faced bans and now the situation is so bad that we are forced to call them back.

Fans are justifiably furious and demand some answers. Players have returned home from India in small groups to avoid the backlash and the PCB has again put together a factfinding committee, like many before, that is supposed to identity the problems, possibly groupism in the team, and recommend some solutions.

From 1996 to 2016, there have been more such committees than a child has gifts on her birthday, but nothing has really happened. So little is the trust that Javed Miandad has refused to be a part of such a mission, calling it useless and a total waste of time.

The game of musical chairs will be on in full swing in the next few days. Some would be kicked out of their chairs while others are going to scuffle to sit on them. But will any a Spartacus rise and try to strengthen the fading roots of Pakistan cricket? One cannot be certain about what the PCB want, but fans would surely pray for such a messiah. If that doesnt happen, it really could be cricket ka Allah Hafiz.

Mohammad Shahzad has a way of becoming the epicentre of action on a cricket field if hes part of the match. The word epicentre is advisedly used, since Shahzads batting has caused a fair bit of tectonic plate shifting in Afghanistans stirring run at the ICC World Twenty20 2016.

Three matches in the first round, three victories. Shahzads scores were 61, 41 and 40  each one at better than a runaball. The upshot was Afghanistan sailing through to the Super 10s round. This was a different Afghanistan, however, than the one the cricket world had gotten used to seeing over the past six years, since they first took part in a world event. Until now, they were spirited and brave and full of all the right stuff. In the ICC World Twenty20 2016 they just said forget it, we can be everyones sentimental favourites, but we want some wins too.

The win arrived, and how  with the biggest scalp of Group 1. Mohammad Nabi tweeted out the message that his side had been yearning to put out.

But the man who symbolised the fearlessness that said Afghanistan werent underdogs, they were here to compete on an equal footing, was Shahzad. In the Super 10s, he had already given South Africa an almighty scare with a scarcely believable 44 off 19. He took the attack to West Indies too, a 22ball 24 first up setting the tone for what was to follow.

But it was on the field that Shahzad really encapsulated the new Afghanistan avatar. Like MS Dhoni, his idol, he showed smarts behind the stumps in running out Andre Russell. Unlike the phlegmatic Indian captain, he indulged in his own version of Dwayne Bravos Champion dance celebration, one that reached a peak with Chris Gayle joining the Afghanistan team for a jig at the end of the match.

I learned a lot of it from them. We have been staying in the same hotel, and Dwayne Bravo taught me how to dance to his song, Champion. So I learned it from him and tried it in the ground, a disarming Shahzad told Wisden India the morning after his teams sixrun win. West Indies didnt feel bad that I danced on it. This was my own celebration, and when we play good cricket in the ground it came out spontaneously. Everyone is happy to see our team, we have good unity, a good combination of spinners and batsmen. Even Gayle came and told us we had done a very good job and he danced with us.

When it was put to him that even though his idol was Dhoni, his batting, his uninhibitedness whether on the field or in front of a microphone  and even his opening role  was more in the mould of Virender Sehwag, Shahzad simply shook his head with the gentle smile of someone who had heard it before. I want to play my own game. I love Dhoni because hes my favourite cricketer but I play my own game. I wait for the loose delivery and when I find one, I try to hit it. I liked to bat like this from the start, since I was a very small kid. Its not that I have played like this just for this World T20 its always been like that. Since my childhood and when I started playing for Afghanistan.

Attack and fearlessness have always been a part of his game then? Yes obviously. And in T20 cricket, everybody enjoys that, even the fans. This is my game. I want to get as many runs for my team in the first six overs, so I go for the big shots. And its true that Im fearless. I enjoy my cricket. Its only for a short time that we get to play so I enjoy everything  on the ground, outside the ground. You should just enjoy and chill.

There might not have been as much chill when he uttered the bynow famous words calling Dale Steyn  easily the most outstanding bowler of his generation  not dangerous after whacking a Steynless South African attack in Mumbai. Look, the pitch at the Wankhede Stadium was very flat and very good for batting, shrugged Shahzad. So nobody is dangerous there. And in T20s especially, a bowler has only four overs so I dont anyone can be dangerous.

Is there any bowler in the world he does think is dangerous? In that match, Chris Morris was dangerous for us. Steyn is also dangerous, but not on that day. That day I told my team, he wouldnt have been dangerous on that pitch because conditions were suiting batsmen. Otherwise, hes a dangerous bowler.

What Shahzad showed through the World T20, though, was that given half a decent chance, the likes of Afghanistan are eminently capable of upsetting, and perhaps even joining the established world order. It was our greatest win, he said of defeating West Indies. We played against a big team, one of the recent world champions, so the morale is very high. Inshallah, well get to beat some more fullmember teams. We have the ability to beat full members, so we need more matches like this and hopefully well get to play against all of them more  West Indies, Sri Lanka, Pakistan, India, South Africa. The boys have the ability to beat the big teams.

What the future cricketing calendar holds, no one can be sure. But its certain that if it doesnt have a lot more of Shahzad and Afghanistan, it will be a poorer place.

You could almost sense Nathan CoulterNiles desperation. His despair. His trepidation. His raw, naked fear. You could almost sense that Nathan CoulterNile didnt want to bowl that delivery. And yet, he had to.

He did, too. A standard fullish delivery outside off, a reasonably sensible option under the circumstances, with an orthodox cover inside the circle sandwiched between the slightly widish longoff and a slightly squarish sweeper on the fence. The batsman leaned forward and crrrrunched it through covers. Ok, so not as violently as that, but the ball fairly screamed across the outfield and past the boundary rope long before you could finish saying Nathan CoulterNile.

That was to be the last stroke to emanate from Virat Kohlis rapier at the PCA Stadium on an emotionsoaked Sunday March 27 night, but what a stroke it was! What a culmination of a series of breathtaking strokes it was  both in that over, which had already gone for 12 in five balls, and throughout the evening when he was always a halfstep ahead of galloping Australia! Each one played under immense pressure, with the weight of the world on his shoulders, with Indias continued participation in the ICC World Twenty20 at stake. In isolation, It was a stroke of genius. As a whole, it was the celebration of the genius that is Virat Kohli, the nailer of chases, the finisher among all finishers.

What is this Virat Kohli all about? Alternately, he is fire and ice. He is fleetfooted and strokemaker extraordinaire. He is creator and destroyer. He is, simply put, the best Twenty20 batsman on the planet right now, beefy Gayle and 360degree AB included.

Chris Gayle and AB de Villiers, Kohlis teammates at Royal Challengers Bangalore, have played some of the most abiding knocks in Twenty20 history  Gayle at both franchise and international level, de Villiers more so in the former. Kohli could have knocked either heavyweight with a feather on Sunday night, much like he did a shellshocked Australia, who knew what was coming but who were simply powerless to stop the Kohli juggernaut.

No one man, not even Sachin Tendulkar at his pomp, has dictated an Indian chase with the felicity, authority and stunning regularity with which Kohli has over the last four years. Its as if he needs a target for that snazzy computer in his head to kick in. He does his calculations almost in a trance  how many needed, how many balls remaining, where the gaps are, which bowlers are the most vulnerable, when to take a calculated risk, and when to step back and merely hare the twos, driving the fielders ragged, driving the bowler to frustration. Unlike Gayle and de Villiers, this isnt death by bludgeoning this is gentle but unstaunched bleeding after a scything cut here, a lightning thrustandparry there. Done with an orthodoxy that, as Kohli has shown time and again, has a definite place in the cute and fancy world of T20 cricket.

That, as much as anything else, was the hallmark of Kohlis masterly unbeaten 82. These runs came off just 51 deliveries, of which nine were struck for fours and two for sixes. If you hadnt watched Kohli bat and if you dont know too much about Kohli  indulge me, that second part may not be applicable to any cricket fan  you might envisage a brutal innings of manic ballstriking, particularly when the next highest score in the successful chase of 161 was 21.

And yet. And yet, this was no frenetic chargethebowlerandhaveago, consequencesbedamned kind of innings. This was a collection of the prettiest cricket strokes on a cricket field, a definitive master class not just in the art of chasing but in the reiteration that you dont need to be unconventional to lord the Twenty20 game.

Not for Kohli the cute dink and the outrageous Dilscoop, the mesmeric switchblast or the cheeky reversesweep. Kohli, him of the strong basics  mentally and gamewise  relied purely on his overwhelming normal batting skills to play an innings of such abnormal excellence that he had past masters, Tendulkar included, eating out of his hands.

Steven Smith didnt have the worst seat in the stadium. Had he not been desperately trying to find ways to derail the Kohli Express, Australias captain would have just watched in jawdropped admiration the precision and calm inevitability with which Kohli approached the task. More than a halfhour after the final act  Mahendra Singh Dhonis lash of James Faulkner that thudded into the longon fence and formalised Indias entry into the semifinal  Smith was still in a daze, not unaware of what had struck him and his mates but still walking around punchdrunk, reeling from the surreal manner in which his pace attack had been decimated without a stroke being hit in anger.

Pretty serious innings, said Smith, mentally shuddering as he tried to put the memories of that dismantling out of his head. I thought we were in a pretty good position at one point there, they were needing around two a ball. I thought 160 was about par on that wicket. It took a seriously unbelievable innings under pressure from Virat Kohli to take his team over the line.
Kohli showcased the virtues of sensational running between the wickets  briefly, when Yuvraj Singh did his ankle and therefore couldnt convert the halftwos into tows, his latent frustrations threatened to burst through but when Dhoni arrived, all intent and purpose, Kohli and he ran like two young lads being chased for having stolen mangoes. That, coupled with the correctness of his strokeplay sent out a strong message to the T20 generation of today that there is a place of orthodoxy in what is often dismissed as a slambang format.

Yeah, I think hes a perfect example of that, agreed Smith when he was asked if this innings  how mundane it is to call it just an innings  was a lesson to youngsters that one can build a T20 knock purely with orthodox shots. He plays good cricket shots, he has got quite incredible wrists, and is able to manipulate where he wants to hit the ball, which is a great skill particularly in this format. Playing good cricket shots is key in these conditions in India, particularly if you hit the gap, outfield is so fast, the ball generally goes to the boundary. Yeah, orthodox shots are pretty important. A little envy, loads of respect. And this Steven Smith, he can bat too.

As can Dhoni, but not quite in the manner of Kohli. Dhoni is the bludgeon, the man with his limitations but who operates brilliantly within those limitations. As Kohli went about dismantling the bowling towards the very end, Dhonis task was to stay with him physically and in spirit, to gently warn him of the pitfalls of early celebration, to push him to run the extra two and, oh yes, to soak in the entertainment.

It was an incredible innings, especially given the fact that the wicket was not too easy to bat on, Indias skipper pronounced. The backoflength deliveries was difficult to get away, especially the spinners. Also, in between, he was hampered when he had the partnership with Yuvi and they couldnt convert those one and a half runs to twos. Maybe because of that, to some extent, we had to chase maybe one run per over more than what we would have liked. It was a tremendous batting effort from him, superb batting. More often than not, it is about selection of shots and execution of shots. Overall, he was very good and also running between the wickets  you take minimum risk if you can run fast.

Simply put, like most things Dhoni, but you could see where the Indian skipper was coming from. Just like Australia could see where Kohli was coming from, and how he was going to smashandgrab. They were prepared for him, and yet they couldnt stop him from running away with it.

On a strip of grass in suburban Sydney, a young boy is practising a new cricketing shot.

Nearby, his father watches on in amusement while he fights his way into an oversized rabbit costume. It is Easter Sunday, and there is an Easter egg hunt to be organised for the children from this street.

The young boy continues playing, engrossed in perfecting a highly unorthodox batting technique. For those acquainted with the antics of the Australian cricket captain in Mohali two days before, this shot is instantly familiar.

For the second time in as many years, Wahab Riaz, the Pakistani paceman, found himself in a standoff with an Australian batsman Once in Adelaide against a bemused Shane Watson, and here in Punjab against Steven Smith. Both times, Riaz thundered in for a losing cause, though not without gaining a legion of fans in the process.

On this second occasion, spectators and television audiences watched on in incredulity as Smith dismantled Riazs cool over the course of the 19th over of Australias innings. The display culminated in a ludicrous final delivery that saw Smith shuffle across his stumps to whip a ball well wide of off stump behind square leg for four. At the nonstrikers end, Watson shared a wry smile with Smith, no doubt recalling the contrast with the fiery spell Riaz pelted his way a year earlier.

Although the shot is one likely to turn even the most adventurous of junior cricket coaches apoplectic, it is this shot that youngsters have spent the greater part of the long weekend holiday in Australia emulating.

The timing of Australias matchup with India in what is effectively a quarterfinal in this World T20 could not be better. It is the Easter long weekend and, for once, the time difference with the tournaments hosts isnt going to keep Australias youngest supporters away.

After a slow start to the tournament, and a number of niggling concerns papered over by Smith and James Faulkner against Pakistan, Australia finally appear fitting opponents for the blockbuster Indian side in a match that each team must win to progress to the semifinals.

Much is at stake for both sides. The Indian players, eager to avoid the ignominy of bowing out in the group stages of the tournament on home soil, carry on their shoulders the expectations of a fan base that readily pours its soul into the game.

For Australia, this match is an opportunity to prove that the team is one that can succeed in all formats of the game, and do justice to Shane Watson in what may be his final international game should the team falter at this hurdle. An embarrassing loss today at the site of Watsons infamous suspension from the Australian Test team three years ago will only rub salt in the wound of what could have been.

Although Australia come off a victory against the exhilarating but infuriatingly inconsistent Pakistan who more often than not lurche towards their potential in fits and starts, the more polished Indian team will pose a different kind of challenge. In their recent encounter Down Under, India raced to a 30 clean sweep of the T20 International series against Australia, demonstrating clinical performances against a haphazard Australia that have yet to crack the formula to dominating this shortest form of the game.

In this tournament, however, India have demonstrated a temperament more akin to the Australians, relying on a few powerful performances from Virat Kohli, MS Dhoni and Hardik Pandya to give themselves a chance of progressing to the semifinal. The unique pressure points of both teams in a highoctane match promise to deliver the goods for audiences craving a showcase of T20 thrills.

In Australia, as the Christian holiday brings family and friends together under one roof, so too will the secular tradition of cricket. It is the glue that binds communities across long, languishing summers. It is the flurry of online activity after every inventive shot by the buccaneering Glenn Maxwell. It is the young boy who forgoes the promise of endless chocolate eggs to instead spend hours emulating his cricketing hero. It is, after all, the unofficial religion of Australians.

A decade ago in Afghanistan, cricket was not near the centre of peoples minds and hearts. Today, you can find kids playing the game in the streets with tennis balls. In school playgrounds, children appropriate identities of their national heroes  I am Nabi, I am Hamid, I am Sami  in the timehonoured tradition of cricketloving people everywhere.

If Mohammad Nabi, Hamid Hassan and Samiullah Shenwari have become stars and idols, its with good reason. In recent years, the Afghanistan team have been the most consistently impressive among those outside the Test fold.

It began with qualification for the ICC World Twenty20 in 2010. In the current edition, though Afghanistan havent won a match in the Super 10s, they gave Sri Lanka some nervy moments, rattled South Africa and came heartbreakingly close to defeating England. Their toughest challenge of all will come against West Indies, the table toppers, on Sunday March 27, but if Afghanistan are to pull off the impossible, one man will have to be at the centre of it all.

Shenwari has been involved in all of his teams most memorable moments. At the Asia Cup in March 2014, he played the starring role in their firstever win against a Test nation when they beat Bangladesh in Fatullah by 32 runs. Almost exactly a year later, Shenwari hit 96 in a onewicket win against Scotland in the 2015 World Cup  Afghanistans first victory at crickets most prestigious event.

My thinking was just that whenever a new batsman was coming to the crease, I told him Stay at the wicket and give me some time, and I will do everything, just stay. My partners gave me good company, reflected Shenwari, while reliving the win against Scotland in a chat with Wisden India. I talked to them, I told them, we need to stay for just five overs, even if we get 10 or 15 runs its enough. No need to be in a rush. I did my job and Im really happy about that.

The job Shenwari alludes to is sharing a 35run stand with Dawlat Zadran for the eighth wicket, and then a 60run association for the ninth wicket with Hassan. Shenwaris share of the 95 runs scored then was a massive 72, and three runs came via extras. He was ninth out, but Hassan and Shapoor Zadran took the team past the 210run target in the final over.

If the Scotland knock  96 off 147  was all about showcasing Shenwaris staying ability, the one against Bangladesh a year before had brought his eagle eye and powerhitting to the fore. Coming together with Asghar Stanikzai at 90 for 5, Shenwari decimated an attack that didnt quite know what hit them in carting 81 off just 69 balls.

I read the wicket, how the ball is coming, read the bowlers, which one should I target, which one should I not, reminisced a smiling Shenwari. He was particularly effective against Bangladeshs leftarm spinners, Abdur Razzak and Arafat Sunny, taking them for 49 runs from 37 balls. I hit some reversesweeps and they lost their line. Also Shakib al Hasan was not playing. The main thing was, stay at the wicket. The team always tells me, No need to worry about your runs. Just stay, and you can do it. Till we have wickets in the end, we can get 100 runs in the last ten overs, easy.

The ability to soak in the pressure, back himself to remain in the middle and get the job done is a hallmark of the man Shenwari looks up to as his batting idol. Although looks up to might sound strange because Shenwari is 29, while Virat Kohli is still only 27. I especially watch Virat Kohli bat. Hes the same like me. He stays at the wicket, anyone gets out or whatever. I havent had the chance to meet him yet, but hopefully someday I will.


