The anthropomorphic multi-utility robot, TARS, from the science fiction movie Interstellar is enthralling to say the least! While it performs versatile tasks like piloting spaceships, collecting data-samples and assisting humans in carrying out heavy duty tasks, it is witty, sarcastic, and humorous too, making it an amazing companion.  Can TARS ever transform into reality?  Well, given the pace at which technology is advancing and considering that personal assistance system like Siri and humanoids like ATLAS exist today, it won’t be long before we have TARS as a real world workmate.  To fulfil my desire to actively contribute in building such futuristic devices, I need technical prowess in all aspects of the computer domain and, therefore, wish to pursue a Masters in Computer Science with the focus on Artificial Intelligence (AI) and Data Mining. After gaining some relevant experience by working with corporate giants like Apple, Alphabet or Microsoft, I wish to start my own company and develop cutting-edge technologies. 
My penchant for programming dates back to my school days when I learnt to develop simple HTML pages and small web applications. A website that I made at the age of 14 for my uncle’s furniture manufacturing company, using CSS, Jquery and JavaScript developed my web developing skills.  Encouraged by the accolades I received, I began publishing websites for local companies.   These small beginnings encouraged me to pursue a Bachelor’s degree in Computer Engineering where I learned fundamentals of mathematical, scientific and engineering concepts.  Due to a focused and persevering attitude, I have maintained an excellent academic record and currently rank second in my class.  
Courses like 'Software Engineering' and 'Software Project Management' taught me how a project is actualized. In due course, I began utilizing UNIX based operating frameworks and became proficient in Linux. Inspired by a TEDx talk on AI, I took up the 'Artificial Intelligence' course by UCBerkeleyX and gained basic knowledge of neural networks, robotics and natural language processing. Consequently, I took up Artificial Intelligence and Soft Computing as elective subjects in the final year of my undergraduate studies, thus building a strong foundation for graduate education.
To further augment my knowledge, I took up an MTA course in Microsoft.NET Framework wherein I developed a Windows application which is presently used in our college for administrating and monitoring the use of computers on campus.  My very first AI driven project was a Web Portal built as a forum for discussions and sharing notes, for undergraduate students in Mumbai.   It had a “Chat Bot” which automatically answered questions based on keyword architecture and redirected the user to relevant pages.
The persistent desire to build a more powerful AI system to benefit mankind led me to take up my current project “Scribe” – a natural language generation system.  Using Apache OpenNLP library, I designed a Java module to read multiple documents and learn the syntax, adapt to the writing style and store this information for generating text. Thus, with only with a few words as input, the system can produce well-written compositions. This system finds its application in Automated Journalism and can also aid non-native English speakers in drafting well-conscripted compositions.
In addition, I am currently working on a technical paper to outline a framework to tackle concerns over the viability of adequate water for consumption in the aging water distribution networks of cities. The proposed system takes into account the current water repository, based on which, it generates a plan using neural networks to manage the available water to mitigate the adverse effects of excess water consumption and insufficient water supply over the entire year. The model constructed is being tested on the water distribution architecture of the city of Mumbai and will serve as a glowing example of AI.
To supplement my academic knowledge and gain professional experience, I interned at Talec Industries and was a part of their “Manufacturing Automation Project” team. After working on planning the electrical architecture, I was involved with algorithm development for VAL system used to control the machines. Subsequently, I also interned at Lynx Synergy and Solutions wherein I worked on a project on refining computerized network problem detection system. Studying an already implemented and inadequately documented project was initially challenging, but in two months’ time, our team was able to eliminate major flaws and redesign the software. 
Apart from my academic and technical endeavours, I always strove to develop a well-rounded personality by actively participating in extracurricular activities. I was part of six different student bodies and was elected as the Technical Head of Computer Engineers Student Society and the Event Management Secretary for the RGIT Computer Society of India. As part of these committees, I conducted multiple workshops such as Android App development, Ethical Hacking and Robotics based on Arduino. I was also appointed as the Secretary General of RGIT Model United Nations (MUN) and organised a city-wide conference, a first in the history of my college. In addition to these, I utilised my free time in teaching under-privileged children and participating in countless coding competitions. To date, I have won two competitions and reached the third round of Tata Consultancy Services’ international programming competition ‘Codevita’. All these endeavours coupled with my strong undergraduate education make me a good fit for the Master’s program at the University of California Los Angeles.
UCLA’s comprehensive curriculum with courses in Machine Learning, Natural Language Processing (NLP), Expert System Development and Parallel Architecture are in perfect resonance with my academic interests. Learning from world renowned professors like Prof. Michael G. Dyer and Prof. Richard Korf, would significantly add to my repertoire of knowledge.  If given the opportunity, I would be honoured to assist them in their research in the field of NLP and heuristic search, respectively. In addition, I am more than excited to be a part of the diverse student committees such as UCLA eGSA and UCLA ACM and keen on collaborating with fellow peers. An extensive review of the university’s website and talking to peers has further cemented my decision, and I am confident that studying at UCLA would afford me fabulous opportunities to succeed in the realm of Computer Science. 
I plan on adding to the diversity of the institution not only through scholastic excellence, but also through contributions in research and co-curricular activities and build a mutually rewarding association. I hope the admission committee deems me an appropriate candidate for the course, and I look forward to being a part of the Fall 2016 incoming batch.
